To install vim on Debian based Linux like ubuntu run the command:

sudo apt-get install vim

You can open vim by running vim command on the terminal.
--------------------
vim 
-------------
There are some commands given to use the vim editor. You can see all commands, 
and it’s documentation by help command as follows:
-------------
:help
--------------
Now to exit type this command 
---------
:!q
--------

Now, Let’s Start to use Vim
To open a file in vim editor just write the file name after the vim command
 in the terminal as follows:
-----------------
vim filename.txt
------------------

Then the file will be opened.

Write into file 

In the previous step we have opened the file now, Let’s write some content 
in to write data we need to go in insert mode. To go into write mode type i.
As follows:
----------------
i
------------

Save and Exit:

We have written the data into a file now the task is to save and close the file 
to do that first exit from insert mode by pressing the Esc key. To write a 
command first type semicolon  (  :  )  and then type the command wq!  
or x! (both do the same thing) And then hit ENTER.
-----------------
:wq!
-----------------

Exit without saving the file:

To exit from the file without saving the file just use the command q! As follows
--------------
:q!
--------------


Vim also comes with its own tutorial. You can see this tutorial by command vimtutor into the terminal .
------------
vimtutor
-------------

Moving the Cursor:

Till now, we are using the arrow keys to move the cursor into a file, but it is not recommended to use arrow keys in vim. Vim provides the special key to move the cursor in the vim editor following are the keys used to move into a file.

* k   ->   move up                                                   ^
* j   ->  move down                                                  k
* h   -> move right                                           <  h        l >       
* l   -> move left                                                   j
                                                                     v

Exiting Vim:

To exit without doing anything go into command mode by pressing the Esc key
and type the following command.

:q

To exit from vim without saving changes type the following command in vim

:q!

To quit and save changes type the following command

:wq

Text Editing: Deletion

We provide x key in command mode to delete the character under the cursor. Move the cursor to the character which has to delete and press Esc key  and then press the x key

x

The character under the cursor will be deleted.

Text Editing: Insertion

We have edited some text files before by using the i key. There are Four keys used for the insertion of text. Just type the key into the normal mode in vim.

 i    ->   This key is used to put the cursor before the current position.
 a    ->   This key is used to put the cursor after the current position.
 o    ->   This key is used to put the cursor below the line.
 O    ->   This key is used to puts the cursor above the line.


Motion: Motions provide context to your Operators. These execute the action in a particular way.

Here is a list of some motions

w - until the start of the next word, EXCLUDING its first character.
e - to the end of the current word, INCLUDING the last character.
$ - to the end of the line, INCLUDING the last character.


We can use motion with the d key and with many more keys

Count: Count is the number for which replete the motion for count number.
 Here is a demonstration of the use of count and motion

To move courser 2 words forward use the following command

2w
Here 2 is the number of counts and w is used for word

To move the cursor 4 lines forward use the following command

4$

Deletion Commands: Always use the Esc key to go into normal mode and
 use the insertion, deletion keys, and other keys. 

To delete the word move the cursor to the beginning of the word and 
use dw command in normal mode. The word under the cursor will be deleted.

dw
To delete more than one word in a single line use the following command.

To delete 2 words use the command

d2w

To delete the line move cursor to the beginning of the line and use d$ 
command in normal mode. The line under the cursor will be deleted.

d$

Undo and Redo:

As we are programmers most time we are using undo and redo .vim to provide 
these to both features in it. To undo press u key in normal mode

u

To redo use the ctrl+r key in normal mode in vim

ctrl+r
Replace :

To replace the character under the cursor use rx command where ‘x’ is a 
character is to replace.

r

Change Operator:

In vim c is used as a change operator. To replace the word use ce command

ce

To replace the line use c$ command

c$

This command will delete the contains from the cursor to the end of the line.
Then this will automatically go into insert mode then you can put anything in
that line,

Cursor location:

We can use the h,j,k,l key to move the cursor in the file but it will be difficult to move in big file vim provide more commands to move into the file.

To move the cursor at the start of the file use the gg command

:gg
To move the cursor at the bottom of the file use the G command

:G
To view the current cursor location in the file using the following command:

:ctrl+g
In place of 32 use can put any line number.

Search:

To search the word After the cursor uses the backslash key and then write the word and press enter.

:/word
Use n to move on next matching word

:n
Use N to move on previous matching word

:N
Search and Replace:

To replace the word in file use s/ command in vim like

:s/searchword/replaceword/
To do replace all occurrence of word use g 

:s/searchword/replaceword/g
This command will replace the word globally.

To confirm before replacements of words use gc

:s/searchword/replaceword/gc
To use this command in the whole file use % before the command

:%s/searchword/replaceword/gc
Vim configuration:

To configure vim, vim comes with the .vimrc file in the home 
directory if this file is not there then create one. Then open 
the file in vim by command 

vim ~/.vimrc
You can put your all configurations in this file.

You can set line number by using a simple command

set number 
Put this command in your .vimrc file

To enable syntax highlighter in vim use command

syntax on
Put this command in .vimrc file then save file and exit after opening 
file again you will see the line numbers in vim.

Vim comes with many color schemes using the command:

colorscheme COLOR_SCHEME_NAME
Replace COLOR_SCHEME_NAME with any color scheme between Default, blue, 
darkblue, delek, desert, elford, evening, industry, koehler, morning, murphy,
 pablo, peachpuff, ron, shine, slate, torte, zellner then save file and exit 
then again open file to see changes.
